# CoodBook for the UCI HAR Dataset

## Overview
The tidy dataset generated by this project consists of averaged Samsung Galaxy sensor readings. The readings are coming from the waist-mounted Samsung Galaxy S-II phone on 30 subjects. The purpose of this expirement is to try to predict the activity of the subject carrying the phone. More description the generated variables will follow.

For more information on this experiment, please follow this link http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

The dataset was obtained from here https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

## Scope
This CoodBook does not describe the raw dataset, however, in the Overview section a link was provided to experiment's page, where it has details of the raw dataset variables. This CoodBook briefly describes the variable of the tidy datasets generated by this projet.

## Tidy Dataset
The tidy dataset of this project consists of 4 variables/columns. The actual dataset can be found in the "tidyDataset.csv" file after the main script of this project runs and finishes. A more description on how to run the main script and access the tidy dataset will be found in README.md file.

Each row of the tidy dataset consists of the average/mean of a variable measured in a certian activity for a certain subject. The average is basically for all the values of that variable in that specific activity carried out by a subject.

The 4 variables of the tidy dataset are:

Activity: Factor w/ 6 levels "WALKING","WALKING_UPSTAIRS", "WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS", "SITTING", "STANDING" or "LAYING"
The activity the subject was involved in

Subject : Factor w/ 30 levels "10","12","13",..,"30"
The subject identifier. Real names are irrelevant and where replaced by these id. Every subject has a unique id.

variable: Factor w/ 66 levels "tBodyAcc-mean()-X",...
The variable measured by the Samsung Galaxy S-II phone for the specified activity and subject. All variables here are an approximated mean from some other variables. Please visit the expirement's page for more info.

value   : numeric  0.257 0.286 0.275 0.27 0.275
The mean of all measured values for the specified variable. The values belong to a certain activity and subject.

## More details on the `variable` values
The variables collected for every activity are 561 in total. However, for the scope of this project, only 66 variables were selected. The selected variables are means and standard deviations approximated from other variables. This project is not concerned of the actial variables, rather on the process of getting and cleaning the raw datasets, so for this purpose, there won't be any further description of the actual variables and what do they represent. The structure of the tidy dataset (which is the scope of this project) was expained above.

## The process of cleaning the raw dataset
The following steps describe the process of getting and cleaning the raw dataset:

1. The script downloads and extracts the raw dataset.
2. For each the training and the test datasets, the dataset is loaded and merged with its corresponding activity and label data.
3. The training and test datasets are then merged together, forming the superset of the whole dataset.
4. The larger dataset's (consisting of the training and test datasets) columns where renamed to the original variable names, making them more technically acceptable.
5. Only mean and standard deviation related variables were extracted from the larger dataset, along with the activity and the subject variables.
6. The activity variable values were replace with the actual activity name, the mapping can be found in the "rawDataset/UCI HAR Dataset/activity_labels.txt" file.
7. The larger dataset was melted, specifically the ids were (Activity, Subject) and all other variables were the measured variables. The final shape of the dataset is (Activity, Subject, variable, value.)

For the sake of verbosity, both the final tidy dataset and the semi-tidy dataset (generated from step 6) where saved.
